NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
INTERPRETING PREDICTION MARKET PRICES AS PROBABILITIES
Justin Wolfers
Eric Zitzewitz
Working Paper 12200
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12200
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2006
We would like to thank Ray Fair, Brian Galebach, Robin Hanson, Robert Hahn, Ed Kaplan, Brian Knight,
Charles Manski, Marco Ottaviani, David Pennock, Erik Snowberg, Peter Norman Sørensen, Betsey
Stevenson, Rob Stevenson and Abe Wickelgren for useful conversations and insights. Wolfers gratefully
acknowledges the support of a Hirtle, Callaghan & Co. – Geewax, Terker and Co. Research Fellowship,
Microsoft Research, the Mack Center for Technological Innovation, and the support of the Zull/Lurie Real
Estate Center. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Justin Wolfers and Eric Zitzewitz.  All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Interpreting Prediction Market Prices as Probabilities
Justin Wolfers and Eric Zitzewitz
NBER Working Paper No. 12200
April 2006
JEL No. D4, D8, G13
ABSTRACT
While most empirical analysis of prediction markets treats prices of binary options as predictions
of the probability of future events, Manski (2004) has recently argued that there is little existing
theory supporting this practice.  We provide relevant analytic foundations, describing sufficient
conditions under which prediction markets prices correspond with mean beliefs.  Beyond these
specific sufficient conditions, we show that for a broad class of models prediction market prices are
usually close to the mean beliefs of traders.  The key parameters driving trading behavior in
prediction markets are the degree of risk aversion and the distribution of beliefs, and we provide
some novel data on the distribution of beliefs in a couple of interesting contexts.  We find that
prediction markets prices typically provide useful (albeit sometimes biased) estimates of average
beliefs about the probability an event occurs.
Justin Wolfers
Business and Public Policy Department
Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Room 1456 Steinberg-Deitrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6372
and NBER
jwolfers@wharton.upenn.edu
Eric Zitzewitz
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University 
518 Memorial Way
Stanford, CA 94305
ericz@stanford.edu
1 
1. Introduction 
In a provocative recent paper, Charles Manski (2004) asked “What is the logical 
basis for interpreting the price of an all-or-nothing futures contract as a market 
probability that the event will occur?”  Moreover, he notes that “recent papers on 
prediction markets provide no formal analysis showing how such markets aggregate 
information or opinions.”  Manski poses an excellent question, and he highlights an 
important topic for research.  As prediction markets have become of more widespread 
interest, the prices of contracts tied to events as diverse as the re-election of President 
Bush, the ouster of Saddam Hussein, next month’s non-farm payrolls number, or the 
success of specific products have been interpreted in both academic and popular 
discussion as though interchangeable with “the market’s beliefs”. 
This paper presents an initial response to Manski’s challenge, providing a formal 
model which provides a plausible microfoundation under which one can treat prediction 
market prices as probabilities.  Further, we explore deviations from our baseline model, 
and show that for most plausible parameters, prediction market prices at least 
approximate the central tendency of the distribution of beliefs of traders.1  The specific 
model offered by Manski is a special case of our model, and while he emphasizes special 
assumptions that can lead his model to yield counter-intuitive results, we show that 
sensible distributions of preferences and beliefs yield more intuitive results. 
We proceed as follows.  The next section sketches two very simple models in 
which prediction market prices coincide exactly with the mean of the belief among 
traders.  The following section generalizes the model, showing that prediction market 
prices can deviate from mean beliefs, but that this deviation is typically small.  The extent 
of the deviation depends crucially on how widely dispersed beliefs are, and so in the final 
section we present field evidence on this point.  To preview, our results suggest that 
while prediction market prices and mean beliefs may diverge, they are typically very 
close.  We interpret our results as providing a microfoundation for the claim that 
prediction markets (approximately) efficiently aggregate beliefs. 
 
                                                 
1 In concurrent work, Steven Gjerstad (2004) and Ottaviani and Sørensen (2006) derive a number of related 
results. 
