NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
PREDICTION MARKETS IN THEORY AND PRACTICE
Justin Wolfers
Eric Zitzewitz
Working Paper 12083
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12083
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2006
This paper was prepared as the entry on “ Prediction Markets”  for the New Palgrave Dictionary of
Economics, 2nd edition, edited by Lawrence E. Blume and Steven N. Durlauf (London: Palgrave MacMillan).
The definitive published version of this extract may be found in the complete New Palgrave Dictionary of
Economics in print and online, forthcoming.  Thanks to Erik Snowberg for very helpful comments.  The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2006 by Justin Wolfers and Eric Zitzewitz.  All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Prediction Markets in Theory and Practice
Justin Wolfers and Eric Zitzewitz
NBER Working Paper No. 12083
March 2006
JEL No. C53, D8, G14
ABSTRACT
Prediction Markets, sometimes referred to as "information markets," "idea futures" or "event
futures", are markets where participants trade contracts whose payoffs are tied to a future event,
thereby yielding prices that can be interpreted as market-aggregated forecasts. This article
summarizes the recent literature on prediction markets, highlighting both theoretical contributions
that emphasize the possibility that these markets efficiently aggregate disperse information, and the
lessons from empirical applications which show that market-generated forecasts typically outperform
most moderately sophisticated benchmarks. Along the way, we highlight areas ripe for future
research.
Justin Wolfers
Business and Public Policy Department
Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Room 1456 Steinberg-Deitrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6372
and NBER
jwolfers@wharton.upenn.edu
Eric Zitzewitz
Stanford University
Graduate School of Business
518 Memorial Way
Stanford, CA 94305
ericz@stanford.edu
 1 
Prediction Markets 
 
Prediction Markets, sometimes referred to as “ information markets,”  “ idea 
futures”  or “ event futures” , are markets where participants trade contracts whose payoffs 
are tied to a future event, thereby yielding prices that can be interpreted as market-
aggregated forecasts.  For instance, in the Iowa Electronic Market, traders buy and sell 
contracts that pay $1 if a given candidate wins the election.  If a prediction market is 
efficient, then the prices of these contracts perfectly aggregate dispersed information 
about the probability of each candidate being elected.  Markets designed specifically 
around this information aggregation and revelation motive are our focus in this article. 
 
Types of Prediction Markets 
 
The most famous prediction markets are the election forecasting markets run by 
the University of Iowa (Berg, Forsythe, Nelson and Rietz, 2001).  Election forecasting 
provides a useful way to introduce a variety of different contract types, and Table 1, 
adapted from Wolfers and Zitzewitz (2004a), shows how different contracts can be 
designed to reveal various types of forecasts. 
 
<Table 1 here> 
 
The three main types of contracts link payoffs to the occurrence of a specific 
event (the incumbent wins the election), a continuous variable (the vote share of the 
incumbent), or to a combination of the two, such as in spread betting.  In each case, the 
relevant contract will reveal the market’s expectation of a specific parameter: a 
probability, mean, or median, respectively.  More complex contract designs can also be 
used to elicit alternative parameters.  For instance, a family of winner-take-all contracts—
each linked to different states of nature— can reveal the full probability distribution. 
Prediction markets have been used to forecast elections, movie revenues, 
corporate sales, project completion, economic indicators and Saddam Hussein’s demise.  
New corporate applications have emerged as firms have looked to markets to predict 
